Provide an update guide (#32384)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/update-to-quarkus-3.adoc

////
This document is maintained in the main Quarkus repository, and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
[id="update-projects-to-quarkus-3-automatically-howto"]
= Update projects to Quarkus 3 automatically
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: core
:extension-status: "experimental"

> :summary: Update projects from Quarkus 2.13 and later to Quarkus 3.

Reviewer: The guide isn't just Quarkus 2.13 and later Quarkus 3 - the update tooling will also work for Quarkus 3.0-3.x's

Reviewer: scratch that - now having  read it all i see this is specifically for quarkus 3 migration. not a generic explanation of the update toolling.

Author: Thank  you, Max.

Author: Thanks for your thoughts on this.

include::{includes}/extension-status.adoc[]

> As a developer, you can update your projects from Quarkus 2.13 and later to Quarkus 3 by running an update command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can update your projects from Quarkus 2.x to Quarkus 3.x by running an update command.
```
a) do we need to be a developer to do this? can't we assume those reading this have developer skills?
 
b) why not just say Quarkus 2.x?

Author: Thanks. Updated. 
I had understood `quarkus update` worked only on 2.13 and later. 
@gsmet can you confirm that it works for Quarkus 2.7-based projects as well?

> The update command uses OpenRewrite recipes to automatically update most of your project's dependencies, source code, and documentation. These recipes cover many but not all of the items described in the link:https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0[Migration Guide 3.0].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The update command primarily uses OpenRewrite recipes to automate updating your project's dependencies, source code, and documentation. These recipes cover many but not all of the items described in the link:https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0[Migration Guide 3.0].
```

not sure about this one but isn't the connotation of using "automatically"  that it will all be done for me; where "automate" is more a "make it easier for me" which seems like a better signal to send.

Author: Thanks. Updated. Good point.

After updating the project, if you do not find all the updates you expect, there are two possible reasons:
- The recipe might not cover an item in your project.
- Your project might use an extension that does not support Quarkus 3 yet.

> In either case, https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues[let us know by filing an issue] so we can improve the update recipe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In either case, https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues[let us know by filing an issue] so we can improve the update command.
```

its not just recipes that can be at fault; also the auxiliary code/commands used to implement it.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

////
This document is maintained in the main Quarkus repository, and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
[id="update-projects-to-quarkus-3-howto"]

> = Update projects to Quarkus 3 automatically

Author: I'd like to use the `{quarkus-version}` attribute but am concerned that for now, during this pre-release period, it would show the wrong version number and confuse reviewers. I've created [a follow-up task](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/QDOCS-295) to take care of it post-release.

> :extension-status: preview

Reviewer 2: The order and ID items in the header items differ from the [contributor guide template & example](https://quarkus.io/guides/doc-contribute-docs-howto#create-quarkus-content-in-asciidoc) for the new diataxis implementation.
 
Minor observation, not sure it makes a difference in upstream output, but it might for our downstream post-fix script/processes. The more consistent the easier for later.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: core
:summary: Update projects from Quarkus 2.13 and later to Quarkus 3.

As a developer, you can update your projects from Quarkus 2.13 and later to Quarkus 3 by running one of the update commands.

> These commands use OpenRewrite recipes to automatically update most of your project's dependencies, source code, and documentation.

Reviewer 2: _These_ is ambiguous. Could we describe the commands and how you can run them earlier before the steps begin? 

Line 58 has some good information that could be placed next to this line.

`You can run the update command from either the Quarkus CLI, Maven, or JBang.
`

Author: Updated. Thanks.

//  For existing applications where all extensions are available, we have an OpenRewrite recipe you can try. GIVE LINK
//
// Once this has been run, your project should update its dependencies, source code, and documentation to use Quarkus 3.
//
// If it does not work for you, we could have missed something, or you are using extensions not yet supporting Quarkus 3.
//
// https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues[Let us know] in either case so we can improve the migration script together.

[IMPORTANT]
====
After updating, evaluate whether your project requires additional follow-up steps.

> Verify that the application from your updated project works as expected before releasing it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Verify that the application from your updated project works as expected before releasing it to production.
```

====

:extension-status: "experimental"
include::{includes}/extension-status.adoc[]

== Prerequisites

:prerequisites-time: 30 minutes
include::{includes}/prerequisites.adoc[]

== Procedure

> . If your project uses Hibernate ORM or Hibernate Reactive, see the link:https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0:-Hibernate-ORM-5-to-6-migration[Hibernate ORM 5 to 6 migration] quick reference.

Reviewer 2: Is the goal/action of step 1 to make sure you are using version 6 of Hibernate ORM? If so, should we be direct here about the required action. Also, wondering if this is more of a prereq?

Author: I'll ask @yrodiere for clarification about the best placement of this information.

. link:https://quarkus.io/guides/cli-tooling#installing-the-cli[Install Quarkus CLI version 3 or later].
. Use your version control system to create a working branch for your project or projects.
. Update the project using the Quarkus CLI:
+

> [source,bash]

Author: [The blog post](https://quarkus.io/blog/quarkus-3-0-0-cr2-released/#automated-migration) *recommends* the Quarkus CLI update command, but not the alternative commands. I'll get SME feedback on this question. If the commands ARE equivalent, I'll combine them as you've suggested.

> [source,bash]

Reviewer 3: The `quarkus update` and `mvn` command are equivalent. The JBang one should not be documented.

> [source,bash]

Author: Updated. Thanks.

////
This document is maintained in the main Quarkus repository, and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
[id="update-projects-to-quarkus-3-automatically-howto"]
= Update projects to Quarkus 3 automatically
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: core
:extension-status: "experimental"

Update projects from Quarkus 2.13 and later to Quarkus 3.

include::{includes}/extension-status.adoc[]

== Introduction

As a developer, you can update your projects from Quarkus 2.13 and later to Quarkus 3 by running an update command.
The update command uses OpenRewrite recipes to automatically update most of your project's dependencies, source code, and documentation.

// Give the link to the OpenRewrite recipe?
// How does the user know what the update command does or does not cover?
// In the migration guide, can we identify which items are/are not covered by the OpenRewrite recipe?
// Do we want to invite feedback? For example: If it does not work for you, we could have missed something, or you are using extensions not yet supporting Quarkus 3.

> // https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues[Let us know] in either case so we can improve the migration script together.

Author: Any thoughts on these questions?

Reviewer 3: > Give the link to the OpenRewrite recipe?

We could but it's hard to understand what it is doing at a glance as it's very long.

> In the migration guide, can we identify which items are/are not covered by the OpenRewrite recipe?

We hope to do that at some point but we are not there yet.

> Do we want to invite feedback?

Yes, please.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

[IMPORTANT]
====
After updating, evaluate whether your project requires additional follow-up steps.
Verify that the application from your updated project works as expected before releasing it to production.
====

== Prerequisites

:prerequisites-time: 30 minutes
include::{includes}/prerequisites.adoc[]

[IMPORTANT]
====

> If your project uses Hibernate ORM or Hibernate Reactive, see the link:https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0:-Hibernate-ORM-5-to-6-migration[Hibernate ORM 5 to 6 migration] quick reference.

Author: @yrodiere 
What's the best placement for this note? 
Does the update command take care of any of the changes described in this quick reference?

Reviewer 4: >  What's the best placement for this note?

I'd merge it into the IMPORTANT block above that starts with "After updating, evaluate whether your project requires additional follow-up steps"?

E.g. :

```
[IMPORTANT]
====
After updating, evaluate whether your project requires additional follow-up steps.

Verify that the application from your updated project works as expected before releasing it to production.

In particular, if your project uses Hibernate ORM or Hibernate Reactive, you will want to read through the link:https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0:-Hibernate-ORM-5-to-6-migration[Hibernate ORM 5 to 6 migration] quick reference.
====

>  Does the update command take care of any of the changes described in this quick reference?

Some, yes; most simply cannot be automated. 

The package changes (`javax.persistence` => `jakarta.persistence`) is definitely handled, and I think @gsmet was considering enabling the [Hibernate ORM 5.6 compatibility switch](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0:-Hibernate-ORM-5-to-6-migration#best-effort-hibernate-orm-56-compatibility-switch), which should address most changes in the "Database schema" section, but I'm not sure he got to doing it.

Regardless... Surely Hibernate ORM is not the only library with changes that are not handled by `quarkus upgrade`. Shouldn't this problem be approached more globally for the whole migration guide? Like linking to the migration guide from here, and somehow documenting in the migration guide whether each section of the migration guide is handled by `quarkus upgrade` or not.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

====

== Procedure

. Use your version control system to create a working branch for your project or projects.
. link:https://quarkus.io/guides/cli-tooling#installing-the-cli[Install Quarkus CLI version 3 or later].
+
[NOTE]
====

> If you choose not to install Quarkus CLI version 3, you can update your project by using Maven or JBang commands in the xref:alternative-commands[Alternative commands] section.

Reviewer 3: The JBang script will go away, let's not document it.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

====
. Update the project using the Quarkus CLI:
+
[source,bash]
----
quarkus update --stream=3.0
----
. Review the output from the `quarkus update` command for potential instructions and, if needed, perform the indicated tasks.
. Review all the changes using a diff tool.
. Review link:https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0[the migration guide] for any items not covered by the upgrade command and perform additional steps, if needed.

> // IMPORTANT: As a developer deciding whether to use the update command, knowing which tasks the update command handles makes it more likely that I'll use this feature. Otherwise, I might avoid it.

Reviewer 3: I agree with that. I'm not sure I will have the time to do anything about it soon though.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

Author: I created https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/32807 to explain and track this potential issue.

. Verify that the project builds without errors and that the application passes all tests and works as expected before releasing it to production.

[id="alternative-commands"]

> == Alternative commands

Author: Do the following commands produce the same results as `quarkus update`? 
Should we keep them here, or would it be better to present them alongside the `quarkus update` command, above?

Instead of using the Quarkus CLI, you can use Maven or JBang to update your project to Quarkus 3.

.Maven

[source,bash]
----

> ./mvnw io.quarkus.platform:quarkus-maven-plugin:3.0.0.Final:update -N -Dstream=3.0

Author: Is `3.0.0.Final` the [correct tag](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tags) or should users specify a later tag?

Reviewer 3: Use `{quarkus-version}` instead. The idea is to use the latest one available.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

----

// .Gradle
//
//I will update and uncomment this section if/when this capability becomes available.

.JBang

If you have JBang installed, update your project:
[source,bash]
----
jbang --fresh upgrade-to-quarkus3@quarkusio
----

For Linux and macOS, if you don't have JBang installed, install JBang and update your project:
[source,bash]
----
curl -Ls https://sh.jbang.dev | bash -s - --fresh upgrade-to-quarkus3@quarkusio
----

For Microsoft Windows, if you don't have JBang installed, install JBang and update the project:
[source,bash]
----
iex "& { $(iwr https://ps.jbang.dev) } --fresh upgrade-to-quarkus3@quarkusio"

> ----

Reviewer 3: As previously stated, let's drop this part.

Author: Updated. Thanks.
